Other good teachers? M.H. Byron.
What did he teach?
He was a research man for the Deadhead. He was the
one that took over the cotton stripper. He, he,
that was his job for years. And he taught me a lot of
stuff. How to, we tore batteries down and repaired
them and put them back together and
car batteries. And charged them up and they had a
whole system there and they kind of, he taught me to
use a torch. Did your dad deliberately teach you
much? He was a hard test master. But did he
instruct? Yes, he did. Is that right? He did. Now,
you didn't have any classes taught by him, did you?
Yes. You did? What was it? It was farm instruction.
And what grade did you make? Do you remember?
Eight. I designed the building on... You know
these Quonset humps that they had? When Dad said,
he said, I want you to design one. See, Dad went down
there on the river during the Depression, and he
bought 150 acres for $10 an acre.
That same land today, you can't buy it for less than
50 grand. Yeah, yeah. So he said, we'll decide a
building down there. So he gave me, that was my
project when I was a senior. And I designed the
thing.
And Dad always wore a suit,
the vest, and he had a and a pocket watch on this
side, and some sort of a little thing over here.
That might have been a Masonic, a Masonic thing. It
was either a Masonic or a S-A-H-E, you know, Aggie
Dream Association. But I think it might have been a
Masonic. I found out here just recently. And so he
had a chain across there. Well, he told me to build a
building like those closets with
a, in a catenary.
You don't know what a catenary is, do you? Catener?
Catenary. No, sir. Catenary. Well, those wires on
a suspension. Oh, I see. Okay. That's a catenary.
Okay. It's always in tension. If you turn it upside
down, it'll always be in compression. You got no
other? So we designed it.
So the reason for asking for that, He came in there
and we were drawing, we drew it up. We had to draw
this thing in there. Big curve at the top. Yeah, big
curve. So I said, I just walked up there one day, I
said, can I have your watch and chain?
We went over there and hung it on the wall. And I got
someone to help me, and we drew that thing exactly
the width that we wanted it. That's the way we got
the catnip. That's the catnip. And that was to
support those upright curve, those arches? Yeah.
So then he says, now, you go take that over and have
a, he had a lot of rapport with those people in the
San Ling Ling. And he said, go take it. I think he
said, I don't remember. I know what a man looked
like. He was a big guy. And I told him what I wanted.
And he said, yeah, set it down there, and I'll look
at it. And he went through some calculations on it
later. And he said, come back in a couple of days,
and I'll have it for you. He went through some
calculations on them, and then he told me that that
thing wouldn't stand up and wouldn't win. He told
me how to fix it. So here's your catenary like this.
He said, put a floor across here. It was a two-story
building. It wasn't big enough for a two-story. He
said, put a floor across here and put some
suspensions right here from that roof down here to
hold that floor. He said, he'll see it. It's strong
enough now. Because you made use of both sides of
that. You transferred it over. Now, in all of your
A&M undergraduate years, you never... uh,
wavered about being an engineer. That was your
plan all the time. That's correct. All right. And,
uh... See, I was raised in a, in a, in a collegiate
family. Sure. Sure. And, uh, did your dad
encourage that goal for you? Oh, yes. Okay. Now,
when you graduated, how well prepared did you
think A&M had made you as an engineer? You felt
comfortable. When you got to Iowa State for your
graduate work, did you find that you were,
compared to other graduate students, were you
well? We were well prepared. Now they were tough.
They were tougher than we'd been used to. Because
old Van Giese, he was a German. And he taught that
same course. And then I went out. And so we got in the
meeting. The
last thing they do for you is they get all your
teachers in there into a session with you. And I had
built a building out there that had a 40-foot span
on it. And
so I had done some, I had taken a course in steel
construction. That's one that I had to take. And
this prof, he said, did you treat that thing? I had
some braces on it. did you create that thing as a
plate girder or did you depend on those trusses?
And I said, I
really depend on those trusses in there. But he
said, do you? And I said, you're right, it could
have been a full plate girder. And so I remember
that thing. Now, you finished at Iowa State and
then came back to A&M? Yeah, that was in 38. 38. And
you joined the faculty then? No, worked for my
father. Worked for your father. For a year. For a
year. And was he, he died the next year? Yes.
It was that, the fall of that year in 38. He was in
Dallas one day and he was walking down the street
and his hand just opened and dropped his suitcase.
Heart attack? No. And that's what we didn't know
about. So it got worse.
And that was it, yeah. It'd be in the fall of 38.
So then
my wife, he wanted to go. He said, take me to Mayo
Clinic. To Mayo Clinic? And so I did. We did. We got
on training. We went through.
St. Louis, and that train was running a hundred
miles an hour. And that thing went across from
there. I said
over there in time, I know what that thing was
doing, but it was clicking and that rail was too
fast. And so they got him up there and They looked at
him and they really didn't know what was going on
with him. They did not know. There was no way they
could tell. He had some impairment with his
hand. And so we were... So then what happened was
that the
hardware and implement association, they always
put on a big deal convention in Houston in the late
January. And it was getting close to that. It was
cold, the blue blades were thick. And so then I
decided that, no, he decided to call Mother and
have her come up here and stay with me, and you got to
go run that convention.
Yeah, I was. I bet I did.
We got the mother up there, and just before that
happened, well, he lost the sense in the side of his
face.
See, they didn't know where it was. They didn't
know whether it was in a muscle or in the spine or
someplace else. But when he lost the sensation in
his face, they knew it was in his head. Mm-hmm. And
so she stayed with him and finally brought him
home. And that was in, he died in November of that
year. Of 39. Yeah, and mother took care of him. And
built a bed down in the sun porch, and she had help,
took care of him. All right, on a happier note, when
did you meet your wife? about right then, about
that. It was a little before that. It was in, when I
got back in 30, yeah, 38. When you got back from Iowa
State? Yeah, I got back in September. And we had
started to build that, we had started, Dan and I had
started to write that handbook for hang
engineers. And so then,
It had a dance over there. So I wanted to go to the
dance. So I asked
Madge Wallace. I don't know if you ever knew her or
not. It's Wallace, Wallace Printing Company, but
she was a, her name just, she married a Wallace. Her
name was Madge Nettles. She had worked with Dan
when he was in the, the resettlement
administration. See, Dad spent several years
right in there while I was at Ames. He ran the
resettlement administration for the government
here. And that was one of the times. And so then I
asked Madge, can you find me a date? And so she went
and got her roommate, which was Margaret. And her
roommate where? In a
rooming house right across from the Catholic
school there in Bride. Oh, okay. And what was this
roommate doing? Was she working? She was a
teacher. Oh, okay. In Bryan High School. And where
had she grown up? In Hubbard, Texas. Hubbard,
Texas. Gone to college where? In Baylor. Baylor,
okay. She finished high school a year ahead of
time. She finished Baylor in three years. And so
you go out with this Baptist girl to the dance. No,
she wasn't a Baptist. Oh, I thought if she went to
Baylor, she might have been. No, she went there.
She went there, and they gave her a job. She ran a
switchboard.
That was her job, and that was primarily due to this
woman. The roommate she had, which was married
with the principal of the school down here, and
that's how she got, she first taught at, Margaret
first taught two years at Adaska, and then she came
down here. Her roommate, told her husband, and the
mortgage was available up there, and so they
bumped into each other one day, and he said, come on
down here.
So she went to work down there, and so this was in the
fall, and we got together a little over about the
middle of the year, Then I had to go to take care of
this convention down here. And then later we
decided to get married. So y'all got married when?
January 11, 1939. 39. And left immediately for the
ASA convention in Minneapolis. We drove a car. And
then we went from there to Washington, D.C., which
I thought would work for the I.R.E.M. Now, after
that, did you ever work for A.N.M. again? No, no.
Yes, I did after World War II. What did you do?
Mother, I was
discharged from Thailand.
came home. Of course we had, by that time, we had
even a child, because the oldest girl was born in
Chicago during World War II. And Margaret worked
in the
personnel department for the University of
Chicago. And
so we came home and we were just sitting around down
there and the REA wanted to send me to the state of
Washington and I said I didn't want to go. And so I
just never did answer their questions. And so
uh, the director of the Inuring Experiment
Station, a good friend of ours, a good friend of
Mother's too, and she, he called Mother up and
says, has Bill come home yet? Yeah, he's been here
about a week. Send him up here. Now who was that? Oh.
Remember his name? Yeah.
You'll think of it in a minute. Go ahead. Yeah.
Anyways, we just walked in up there. And he said, I
got to have somebody to administrative
assistant.
So I got hired right then. They just made out the
papers and hired me. And so then I did a lot of, for
them, I did a bunch of different things. It was just
an administrative job. I was just taking care for
the vice director. I think he was the vice
director. Describe this campus right after the
war was over as the veterans start pouring in here.
What was it like? Oh, they converted Walden Hall to
some apartments. And then the women came in there
pregnant. How
long
did it take to get the temporary buildings near
Kyle Field and the old, near the old,
oh what, where the poor boys lived during the
Depression? How long did it take them to move those
in? Did they do that quickly? They were already
there. They were there way back. Didn't they put in
some new temporary structures down there also?
They were mostly houses that were on the on the
street there on Bush Avenue. Okay. To the, to the,
to between there and the Wellborn, you know.
Mm-hmm. There's a whole bunch right in there.
Yeah, yeah. And they were saying some constructed
elsewhere, and then a large home would be taken
over, and they would, they would, the county
would, would get together. Mm-hmm. And they
would, they would kind of have an association of
some sort that, and they were supplying money, and
more than that, goods, whatever, and food. But
then after World War II, Usually one of the, there
was a mother came with them. After World War II,
weren't there a whole bunch of Quick, new,
temporary buildings for the veterans to live in?
Vet village type of things? Yeah, they moved those
up. They moved them up there on
the old Aging Farms where it was. Okay. All those
things up there were constructions. They were,
now they're permanent buildings, but they moved
in. Now called College View. Yeah, College View.
But they were temporary. Where did those
buildings come from? Did they come from the Air
Force Base? Bryan Field? I don't think they did.
There wasn't enough out there.
See, Bryan Field was a, was a
training base for instrument flying.
And they had taken over the college, the
Easterwood here. See, Easterwood was built
under, by the FAA. So if a military wanted it,
they'd just give them a dollar and they got control
of it. That's what happened. And they used it
principally for training students to land and
take off under instrument conditions. And so
that's what that was for. Now the vet, but the
veteran students changed this community, didn't
they? They did, they did. Friends were, and they,
they, they put in a, a, right in Speesa Hall in the,
They put in another eating joint down there from
the side. You went in that side door. And that's
where the people from Walden Hall ate. You had to
eat over there. And were those veterans good
students? Wonderful students. That's what I've
always heard. That's what I've always heard. All
right, you worked for then the college. How long?
14 years, up to 1960. Okay, and were you with the Ag
Extension Experiment Station all those years?
What happened was that at first I was an
administrative assistant. I had, I had a whole
five or six stenographers. They brought me
engineering bulletins that were in manuscript
form. And I had all these people there. Then I'd
take them, had to take them over to Austin to a Bible
printer who had estate contracts at the
publisher. They got through. Now that was one of
the jobs I had. Then I had other Everything came up
with a job of some sort. So then you had an estate
required that you couldn't have an escalation
cross in anything you bought. I mean, you had to
price. So they wanted a motor for the wind tunnel.
Where are we going to get a motor for the wind
tunnel? Well, we scurried around and asked a lot of
questions, and finally found out that there was a
rewind company, and we wanted 2,000 horsepower
engines. And he came back at us and said, Well, he
could get us one, and it
turned out what it was was a big generator, a 2,000
horsepower generator that was hooked to those big
engines on the 29s for test work in a plant in
Chicago, Illinois. that's where those engines
were tested and they were run six hours on that and
torn down and then they were put back together and
rerun well he bought one this guy was rewind man
bought one of those things rewinded into a motor
and gave us a price and we bought it and we shipped
down here and
old Frank Brown, old Frank Brown is his name, he was
the college electrician. That thing had a
starting circuit on it was 2300 volts. And that's
all it had, that's the only piece of line they had
going out there. And they could only run it at night
because we didn't have enough fire to pull them.
Which is common in most, uh, uh, wind tunnels.
Mm-hmm. They, they absorb so much of our, you know,
even their own air. The one that, I know the one up
there in the right field that we run at night,
40,000 horsepower. Now, during these years,
where was Ag Experiment State, uh, where were
y'all located? Well, we, in 1935, we, uh, 34, we got
in the Aggie Union Building. All right, and was
this all the time? Huh? No, I'm sorry, I didn't mean
Aggie Union. No, you were working for the
Experiment Station or the Extensions? Yeah,
uh-huh. Where was the Experiment Station
located? Uh, in the, uh... geology building. Now
this is after World War II. Yeah, it had a little top
on it. Who was the director when you went to work in
45 or 46? What the heck, the old doctor, he was a
nice, oh, and then later, oh yeah, what was his
name, he came in there.
That's the second one. All right, now y'all
reported to the dean of agriculture? Dean of
engineering. And who was the dean then?
Benson. No, Benson wasn't dean yet. Was it
Calhoun? Might have been. It didn't bother me. I
was too damn busy. Did, how did you feel about? Oh,
yeah, we had another one. We had Langford, not the
one you know, but they had a man called Langford
that he was working on
freight race. That was in there. That was mixed up
in there. So I had a, you know, I didn't like that.
And across the street, across the, that was on the
east side of the, in the fourth floor up there, and
on the other side there was, was Dr. Lindsey, who
was head of the, came from the Lindsey and Ingram
department. And he had three boys,
one of them a doctor, one of them would take care of
your life, your eye case, and one of them a lawyer. I
knew all three of them. I knew the old man too. Who
was the A&M president when you got back?
I don't know. Gilchrist? I guess Gilchrist was.
Were you aware of that march the students made when
the Corps marched on his house to try to revolt?
He was trying to crack down on them to quit hazing
the freshmen so long, and they tried to confront
him. Where was he? He was in the college residence
up there? He was living in the president's house,
yes, sir, and they marched on that house one night.
I don't know anything about that. During those
years, in the late 40s and 50s, did you and your
colleagues think A&M was making progress? Oh,
yes.
We knew for a fact that they were going to do two
things. They were going to let the niggers in, and
they were going to let the women in. I made a million
old men mad, because I said, which do you want
first? You want the nigger in there, or you want the
nigger in there? You want the woman in there. And,
of course, they preferred the woman.